# Lesson 4 Notes

### Dashed (Explicit): Lines we have created using rows or columns (solid lines: where explicit starts and stops)

### Dotted (Implicit) Track: Lines that were generated by the browswer when we created rows or columns

---

# Lesson 5 Notes

**Implicit**

* Browser has created for you

**Explicit**

* You have created (black line in mozilla)

### Adding Items

When we add the 5 and 6th box, even though we have two rows the browser will make a third row and put the extra items there (implicit row)

**When creating columns, it will automatically create rows for you** (Implicit)

### grid-auto-rows

* This property enables you style 'the extra' elements (5 and 6th box) and style them implicitly
* All other items that do not fit inside the second row (which user created) style them implicitly (like 5 and 6), so if we add more items (7 and 8) they too will be 200px

---

# Lesson 6 Notes

### grid-auto-flow

* Determine whether you need to add another row or column (b/c in our current example we only defined two columns)

Ex.

```
grid-auto-flow: column
```

* The extra item is not being created as a row, but as a column

### grid-auto-column

* basically says any column that has been implicitly created will be 200px or w/e

---

# Lesson 7 Notes: Sizing

**Quick Note Using %'s** **DO NOT TRY TO ADD UP TO 100**

```
grid-template-columns: 25%, 25%, 25%, 25%;
```

* THis will add up to 160 (25 + 25 + 25 + 25 + 20 (from padding));

### #fr unit (fractal unit)

Represent the amount of space left after all the elements are laid out

Ex.

```
grid-template-columns: 200px 200px 1fr
```

* Basically the two rows take up 200px and then the third column will take up whatever space is left over

---

# Lesson 8 Notes: Repeat Function

Ex.

```
grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr 1fr;
```

or

```
grid-template-columns: repeat(4, 1fr);
```

Ex.

```
grid-template-columns: repeat(4, 1fr, 3fr); 8 columns
```

---

# Lesson 9 Notes: Sizing-Grid-Items

### span

* If you want an element to take up multiple spots on the grid use span

Ex.

```
    .container {
      display: grid;
      grid-gap: 20px;
      grid-template-columns: repeat(5, 1fr)
    }

    .item9 {
      grid-column: span 2;
    }
```

* the item 9 will take up two spots ( 9 and 10);

* if we did
  Ex.

```
    .container {
      display: grid;
      grid-gap: 20px;
      grid-template-columns: repeat(5, 1fr)
    }

    .item9 {
      grid-column: span 3;
    }
```

* the browswer will leave an empty space and put the item 9 on the third row

Ex.

```
    .container {
      display: grid;
      grid-gap: 20px;
      grid-template-columns: repeat(5, 1fr)
    }

    .item9 {
      grid-column: span 2;
      grid-row: span 2
    }
```

* So now item 9 will take two spots horizontally and vertically

---

# Lesson 10 Notes: Placing Grid Items

### grid-column

* Short for
  1. grid-column-start
  2. grid-column-end

Ex.

```
grid-column: span 2;
```

samething as

```
grid-column-start: 4;
grid-column-end: 6;
```

```
grid-column: 1/-1    -> start: 1 end: 6 (entire grid)
```

Ex.

```
    .container {
      display: grid;
      grid-gap: 20px;
      grid-template-columns: repeat(5, 1fr);
      grid-template-rows: repeat(5, 1fr);
    }

    .poop {
      background: #BADA55;
      grid-column: span 2;
      grid-row: 1 / -1;
    }
```

* Must give the grid approriate amount of rows for grid-row to work properly

---

# Lesson 12 Notes: Auto-Fit and Auto-Fill (https://css-tricks.com/auto-sizing-columns-css-grid-auto-fill-vs-auto-fit/)

### Why?

* tells the browser to handle the column sizing and element wrapping for us
* so that the elements will wrap into rows when the width is not large enough to fit them in without any overflow

### auto-fill

* FILLS the row with as many columns as it can fit
* So it creates implicit columns whenever a new column can fit, because it's trying to FILL the row with as many columns as it can.
* The newly added columns can and may be empty, but they will still occupy a designated space in the row.

Ex. from the website

* auto-fill behavior: "fill that row up! Add as many columns as you can. I don't care if they're empty — they should all still show up.
* If you have enough space to add a column, add it.
* I don't care if it's empty or not, it's still occupying space in the row as if it were filled (as in: filled with content/grid items)."

### auto-fit

* FITS the CURRENTLY AVAILABLE columns into the space by expanding them so that they take up any available space.
* The browser does that after FILLING that extra space with extra columns (as with auto-fill ) and then collapsing the empty ones.

* Fill the row with more columns are the viewport width increases, but the only difference is that the newly added columns (and any column gaps associated with them) are collapsed.

---

# Lesson 13 Notes: minmax

* makes it possible to define the size of a grid track as a minimum to maximum range so that the grid can adapt to the viewport of each user the best possible way

* In our current example we have

```
 /* grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, 130px); */
```

* and because of this the content starts to spill out, so minmax helps figuring out wide the columns should be

Ex.

```
grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(150px, 1fr));
```

* here we are setting the min. and the max so the columns will not go below 150px

**Quick Note**

* Can see the difference between auto fill and auto fit in this example

### fit-content

/_ grid-template-columns: fit-content(100px) 150px 150px 150px; _/

* able to clamp so the first row will not go below 100px wide

---

# Lesson 14 Notes: Grid Template Areas

see example
